---
layout: post
title: "Müstair to Erlbach"
author: The Reads
date: 2018-04-07
image: 
tags: IT
---

Passing slowly through countries, crossing land borders you gradually notice changing customs, architectures and surrounding landscape. Cross over the Müstair valley border from Swizerland into Italy there was an instant change - the road condition rapidly degraded, the cars got smaller (from four wheel drive BMWs to fiat puntos) and the driving faster and more crazy. The language, much to our initial surprise however did not. In the South Tyrol (or Alto Adige) region of Northern Italy 62% of the population speak German and only 23% speak Italian as their first language.  

It was a great descent down the valley, gradual and deserving after all those mountains climbed in Switzerland. There are well marked cycle routes that keep you off the main roads and take you through acres and acres of apple orchards. They harvest 5 billion apples from the region every year from 18,000 hectares of orchard, meaning that every 8th apple in Europe is a product of South Tyrol! None of our photos really do the scale any justice, although I imagine it would be a beautiful place to visit in early summer when the blossom is in full bloom.

Of course downhills can't last forever and we were destined to go up in order to reach the mighty Dolomites. The cycle path took us through Merano and the regional capital Bolzano, before taking a very steep 400m climb up to the Dolomiti foothills and the 5 star Seiser Alm campsite with better shower facilities than most hotels!! With snow forecast higher up the next day we decided to stay and walk up to the refuge for lunch where we had the most incredible homemade Knödel (bread dumplings) with cheese and spinach, and white asparagus ravioli
