---
layout: post
title: "Reflections"
author: The Reads
date: 2019-06-16
image: 
tags: FI    
---

It's now been two months since we arrived back in Wellington. The first week was a blur, that fun, friendly feeling of being surrounded by family and old firends in the lead up to Easter weekend was good, it felt like a holiday. Week two was harder, reality set in, our boxes arrived - all 34 of them - roughly 140 cubic feet worth of clothes, shoes, books, niknaks - stuff that we'd managed to live so happily without for a year and then suddenly found ourselves needing in order to fit back into 'normal life' whatever that might be. At first it was fun unpacking, a little like Christmas, peeking open the corners of parcels wrapped in brown paper. Then we got onto the clothes boxes - joy oh joy to have more than a choice of one jumper and a pair of leggings to wear! Joy, soon turned to discomfort - do I really need ten jumpers? The charity pile grew...

Half-way through that second week we had the pleasure of housesitting for some friends who live a two-minute from the beach at Lyall Bay. It should have been bliss but all of a sudden a wave of depression hit and I started sobbing uncontrollably. I wasn't ready for it and didn't see it coming. I was the one who wanted to get back to Wellington and start a new life again, who persuaded Jules to save cycling up the North Island for another trip, who said stop - let's settle down now. Many poeple in my life have struggled with depression to varying degrees but it wasn't until that day that I really understood how they felt, how a big black hole opens up inside you and nothing anyone can say or do can take you out of it. Having Jules for support was crucial and walking outside, talking through how we felt slowly helped me piece myself back together. 

Would I do it again? My initial response has been not for so long, although perhaps as a retirement holiday later in life - I was inspired by many over-60's we saw throughout our cycle! I will definitely be doing shorter tours. Even a weekend (we're yet to do the Rimutaka Trail just north of Wellington). The experiences you get when travelling by bicycle are unique. You roll into a village pretty much anywhere in the world and are almost instantly on a level playing field with those around you. Your posessions are there for all to see, you are vulnerable and open, but that also makes you less of a threat and open to opportunity. I can't count the amount of times a smile, 'hello', or friendly nod to a passerby resulted in a converstaion, an offer of tea, food or even a bed for the night. The things we learnt about those people, their way of life, their country, gave me insights into a whole new world. In contrast to the constant barrage of bad news the media brings us our journey showed me that 99.8% of people have a good heart. It was often the poorest who were the kindest, who valued their family and communities the most and left us with a warm glow in our hearts as we pedalled away, genuinely feeling we were leaving life-long friends.

Personally the trip has pushed me beyong mental and physical boundaries I wasn't sure I'd be capable of crossing. I'm naturally gung-ho, willing to give most things a try, but cycling into headwinds with sub-zero temperatures at high altitude I broke. I cried, I stopped, I took deep breaths, and carried on, becasue there were no other options except stay there and freeze to death! I've realised the I have the ability to push through my fears such as cycling up steep inclines that at the beginning of the journey made me want to get off and walk. They still get my heart racing but I tend to be able to control the panic in my mind a bit better now and am learning to apply that to other areas of life. 

It was extremely liberating to travel for a year and let go of social hierarchies, perceptions and the 'keeping up with the Jones's' mentatlity that seems to pray on us all and keep us from being happy. I re-discovered the feeling of pure joy and wonder that makes you want to whoop and laugh and hug someone. Those are the moments I'll never forget and that will keep me exploring the outdoors and silencing the little voice inside that says 'I can't' - because 9/10 times you can and you'll feel 100% better for giving it a go either way. So what are you waiting for? Get up and go!



